# Project Synopsis

The occurrence of hypoxic conditions in benthic ecosystems is threatening the productivity of Pacific crab fisheries, particularly that of Dungeness crab. Hypoxic water is naturally forming, but anthropogenic influences have exacerbated their effect, increasing duration and intensity. Primary drivers include spring coastal upwellings of low oxygen water onto the continental shelf, which is increasing under the effects of climate change, and algal blooms caused by nutrient runoff. This project sought to define the physiological impacts of exposure to hypoxic conditions on _Hemigrapsus oregonensis_, a model organism chosen for its ease of handling and relatedness to Dungeness crabs and explore how depth distribution might alleviate impact. The null hypothesis was that exposure to hypoxia would elicit no discernable physiological response, and the alternative hypothesis was the physiological stress would be exhibited in altered respiration and lethargy. Treatments were designed to replicate the conditions of our control tank, adding hides and beginning with normal dissolved oxygen levels. One experimental tank was sealed with tape and gave the crabs no access to the surface. The other tank was made to simulate intertidal conditions by providing access to the surface to allow emersion breathing. Crabs were held in tanks for two weeks, with non-lethal tests administered after each week and lethal tests at the end of the experiment. Non-lethal tests included righting tests and resazurin assay. Lethal tests included hemolymph draws to measure lactate production and gill tissue dissection. Dissolved oxygen content was observed to drop from 6-7ppm to 3.9 and 3.6ppm after one week and then to 3.2 and 3.4ppm after two. This study found that respiration rate was raised under hypoxic conditions while lactate production fell, indicating inefficient respiration. Gill tissue wasting was observed across all treated crabs but was much more prevelant in crabs without access to the surface. Additionally, all crabs without access to the surface died after two weeks, while crabs with access only experience one mortality. Crabs in the intertidal treatment fared better overall but were still affected by hypoxic stress. Intertidal ecosystems may offer improved survivability during hypoxic events, but not indefinite survival.
